---
layout: post
title: "Coaching. Passion as a contagious disease"
description: the importance of individual approach in learning
modified: 2015-10-22
category: articles
tags: [coaching teaching blog post]
comments: true
---
<p align="justify">

It has come to my realization, that many teachers and music instructors believe that their professional role is simply - to teach music. To share their wisdom and experience in music their field, and show practice techniques that they believe work for certain instrument. Maybe also to inspire students with interesting music literature. Transferring collected knowledge to young minds eager to discover the world of music and master instrument skills… Only if it was that simple and direct. How many of you had troubles with students not showing up, not listening, not improving, not preparing for lesson?

In my practice as a vocal coach and music teacher, the most challenging and necessary has been to diagnose what my listeners actually, individually need and provide them with suited tools in one-to-one sessions. Only by efficient communication and understanding I have a chance to really make an impact on their lives. If making music is considered a goal, then there are many elements absolutely necessary to reach it, but often - not present. For some students it might be self-efficacy - belief that they can achieve goals on their own, do great music, create something valuable, and sometimes simply - improve their condition. For others it is passion and motivation - feeling that the spark appearing from time to time in their guts can to turn into flames driving their life, if nurtured properly. Some people who want to learn singing, don’t even feel worthy presenting themselves to others. They are afraid of hearing their own voice - cause it might not be good enough.. Many of them compare themselves too much to to others, believing that the grass is greener on the other side of the river. Some cover their performance, showing all the cards they have already in first two minutes on the stage, cause they are afraid that their nakedness is boring and imperfect. It all comes from insecurity and destructive fear of not meeting expectations of others - that we, as experienced performers - can help them with.

I believe that in order to really meet our listeners we should consider, that music and art are just instruments in the search of happiness and meaningful life. Kids want to play music mostly because they want to be good at something, be special in their group, and be able to express them selves (“Effortless Mastery” by Kenny Werner, 1996). Singers who sign up for choirs often want to be be a part of a special community where they can spend quality time with others; a part of something bigger, greater, a harmonious group which has got their back and has a common dream. Some music adepts will strive for popularity. Others priority is to free themselves from technical and formal limits, playing their instrument. A few want to make new trends in art. Some want all those things together. Not every music student wants to be a champion and it also should be ok. Understanding what it is exactly that brings students to a music teacher gives us a chance to become better at what we - instructors - do. We can adjust the literature, techniques, intensity of practice, and the way we approach our students. And by being good, reflective pedagogues we can also help them with their personal areas of deficiency.

Even though our times are bombarded with mindfulness-course offers, live-your-dream mottos, motivation speeches on TED, role-models available everywhere there is still a great deal of society not believing in themselves, not feeling worthy or talented enough, not being able to concentrate and find internal motivation. Power of self-esteem and self-efficacy in learning is still underrated. Great musicians and artist are made of those, who accept themselves for who they are. Who are not afraid of being criticized, making a failure or not satisfying others. They learn fast and think constructive. And our role as teachers is to help our students accept themselves and through teaching music - show them that they CAN make great things. I myself have gone through hell of music education in my home country,  with teachers who didn’t respect me, who were inflexible, not really engaged in my learning. Who made me believe that I’m not ready to perform, that my music is not worth anything, that I have to fit into those ridiculous ancient frames. And they were so uninspiring… 

I can’t emphasize how important this all is for learning, listening, and in the end - for quality of ART created. I also believe, that this is the way, talent is developing - form courage to experiment, express, communicate and be ourselves. Just think, that we could actually affect people’s lives like this, changing the world from where we are standing, and this way contributing to art. Luckily passion is a contagious disease…